Overall the article is fine. It's quite technical, but the language is
clear and I didn't have any trouble following the argument (so one
would need to be generally intelligent, but need not be a software
programmer to understand). I do wonder if the introduction were
written by someone other than the person who wrote the body of the
article, there is some strange language there - look at the very first
sentence of the paper, "IDP is a joint project among a number of
institutions aimed at *improving and combining the relationships
between* three digital papyrological resources..." I think I know what
they mean, but they aren't really saying what they mean. How do you
combine relationships? See also: "DDbDP digitally collects a number of
transcriptions..." The entire first page needs to be gone over and
perhaps even rewritten to match the tenor of the rest of the paper.
Maybe I'm being too critical, but the rest of the article was quite
fine.

A few minor points:

P. 3: "As an example, the English Wikipedia..." should perhaps be
"English-language Wikipedia"
P. 11: "Figures 5 and 7 illustrate how a traditional print
transcription..." That should definitely be Figure 6 instead of 5
FN 16: Ends with "see also footnote ." - number needs to be added
there, maybe 12 which is also a FN about RDF

I hope my comments are helpful. Generally this is an interesting and
informative article, well-written except for the introduction.
